№1
The solar system is made up of the sun, planets, moons, asteroids, and comets. The sun is the center of the system, and everything orbits around it. The eight planets are 
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Earth is the third planet from the sun and the only one known to support life. The planets travel in 
elliptical orbits, and it takes different amounts of time for each planet to orbit the sun. For example, Earth takes one year, but Jupiter takes almost 12 years. Some planets, 
like Saturn and Jupiter, have many moons. Other planets, like Mercury and Venus, have none. The largest planet in the solar system is Jupiter, and its Great Red Spot is a giant 
storm that has been raging for centuries. Saturn is famous for its beautiful rings, which are made of ice and rock particles. In 1969, humans landed on the Moon, Earth's only 
natural satellite. The exploration of other planets, like Mars, is a major goal for future space missions. There are also many asteroids and comets that travel around the solar
system. Asteroids are rocky objects that are mostly found between Mars and Jupiter. Comets are made of ice and dust and often have long, bright tails when they approach the sun. 
The solar system is just one small part of a much larger universe. Scientists are constantly discovering new things about it, using telescopes and space missions. We are still 
learning about the possibility of life on other planets. Studying the solar system helps us understand the origins of our own planet. The more we explore space, the more 
questions arise. Each new discovery opens up the possibility for even greater knowledge.


№2
One evening, Anna decided to take a walk through the forest near her house. It was a quiet night, and the moonlight made the trees look like shadows. She had been walking for 
about an hour when she noticed something unusual: glowing lights in the distance. At first, she thought it was just a reflection of the moon, but as she moved closer, the 
lights became clearer. They looked like tiny fireflies but moved in strange patterns. Suddenly, she heard a soft voice behind her, “Don’t go further.” Anna turned quickly but 
saw no one. She was both scared and curious, so she continued walking toward the lights. As she got closer, she found an old wooden door in the middle of the forest. It looked 
out of place, like it didn’t belong there. The door creaked open as if someone had been expecting her. Anna hesitated but decided to step inside. To her surprise, the room was 
warm and cozy, with a fire burning in the fireplace. There were books scattered all over the table, and an old chair sat in the corner. On the wall was a large painting of a 
woman with bright green eyes. The woman in the painting seemed to be looking directly at Anna. Suddenly, the room grew dark, and the painting moved. The woman stepped out of 
the frame and whispered, "You were meant to find this place." Anna felt her heart racing. The woman reached out and handed her a small, glowing stone. As soon as Anna took it, 
she was back at the edge of the forest. The strange door was gone, and everything seemed normal again. But she still had the stone in her hand. It was cold to the touch, and 
she wondered if she would ever find the door again.

№3
Last summer, I had my first job at a local café. I was excited because it was my first real work experience, but also nervous. On my first day, my manager showed me how to take 
orders and serve drinks. I had to learn how to make coffee and tea, which was harder than I expected. Some customers were friendly, while others were impatient, which made me 
nervous. I also had to clean tables and wash dishes when it wasn’t too busy. At first, I was slow, and I made a lot of mistakes. But over time, I became more confident. My 
coworkers were very helpful and taught me a lot. They showed me how to handle difficult customers and manage busy periods. I learned that it was important to stay calm and 
focused, even when things got stressful. Sometimes I worked long hours, but the tips I received made it worth it. By the end of the summer, I felt like I had learned a lot. 
I was proud of myself for doing a good job and earning money. I even became friends with some of my coworkers. My boss thanked me for my hard work and said I had done well. 
I realized that working at a café taught me responsibility, patience, and teamwork. It wasn’t always easy, but it was a great experience. Now, I feel more prepared for future 
jobs. I would definitely consider working at a café again.

№4
The telephone is one of the most important inventions in history. Before its invention, people had to send messages by writing letters, which could take days or even weeks. 
Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876. His goal was to improve communication for people who were deaf, like his mother. The first successful telephone call was 
made by Bell, who said to his assistant, “Mr. Watson, come here. I want to see you.” This invention changed the way people lived and worked. With the telephone, people could 
communicate instantly over long distances. At first, telephones were large and not easy to use, but they became smaller and more efficient over time. In the early 20th century,
telephone lines were set up in cities, and eventually, they reached rural areas. This made it easier for people to talk to family and friends far away. In the 1980s, mobile 
phones were invented, allowing people to make calls without being tied to a landline. Today, smartphones have become an essential part of daily life. They are not just used for
making calls, but also for sending messages, taking photos, and accessing the internet. The telephone has revolutionized communication and helped bring the world closer 
together. It has played an important role in business, education, and emergency services. Alexander Graham Bell’s invention was truly groundbreaking. We now live in a world 
where instant communication is possible. The telephone has made life faster, easier, and more connected. Bell's invention will always be remembered as one of the most 
important milestones in technological history.

№5
School uniforms have been a topic of debate for many years. Some people believe uniforms are a good idea, while others argue they are unnecessary. One argument in favor of 
school uniforms is that they create equality among students. When everyone wears the same clothes, there is less pressure to wear expensive or trendy outfits. This can help 
prevent bullying, as students are not judged based on their appearance. Uniforms also make getting ready for school easier, as students do not have to decide what to wear every
morning. Furthermore, uniforms promote a sense of discipline and school spirit. On the other hand, some people believe that uniforms restrict students' personal expression. 
Clothing is a way for young people to show their individuality, and uniforms take that away. Some students may feel uncomfortable in a uniform or dislike the design. 
Additionally, uniforms can be expensive for some families, especially if the school requires specific brands or colors. In my opinion, school uniforms have both benefits and 
drawbacks. They can help reduce social pressure and create a more focused learning environment. However, schools should allow some flexibility in terms of accessories or casual
wear. Students should still be able to express themselves in a way that feels comfortable to them. Ultimately, it is important to find a balance between uniformity and 
individuality. Schools should consider the needs and opinions of both students and parents when making decisions about uniforms.

Translation 1
Сонячна система складається з Сонця, планет, супутників, астероїдів і комет. Сонце є центром системи, і все обертається навколо нього. Вісім планет — це 
Меркурій, Венера, Земля, Марс, Юпітер, Сатурн, Уран і Нептун. Земля — третя планета від Сонця і єдина, на якій, як відомо, існує життя. Планети рухаються по 
еліптичних орбітах, і кожна планета обертається навколо Сонця за різний проміжок часу. Наприклад, Земля обертається за один рік, а Юпітер — майже за 12 років. Деякі планети, 
такі як Сатурн і Юпітер, мають багато супутників. Інші планети, такі як Меркурій і Венера, не мають жодного. Найбільшою планетою Сонячної системи є Юпітер, а його Велика 
червона пляма — це гігантська буря, яка вирує вже століттями. Сатурн відомий своїми прекрасними кільцями, які складаються з частинок льоду та скель. У 1969 році люди висадилися
на Місяці, єдиному природному супутнику Землі. Дослідження інших планет, таких як Марс, є головною метою майбутніх космічних місій. Існує також багато астероїдів і комет, які 
рухаються навколо Сонячної системи. Астероїди — це скелясті об'єкти, які в основному знаходяться між Марсом і Юпітером. Комети складаються з льоду і пилу і часто мають довгі 
яскраві хвости, коли наближаються до Сонця. Сонячна система — це лише невелика частина набагато більшого Всесвіту. Вчені постійно відкривають про нього щось нове, 
використовуючи телескопи та космічні місії. Ми все ще досліджуємо можливість існування життя на інших планетах. Вивчення Сонячної системи допомагає нам зрозуміти походження 
нашої власної планети. Чим більше ми досліджуємо космос, тим більше питань виникає. Кожне нове відкриття відкриває можливість для ще більших знань.

Translation 2
Одного вечора Анна вирішила прогулятися лісом біля свого будинку. Була тиха ніч, і місячне світло робило дерева схожими на тіні. Вона йшла вже близько години, коли помітила 
щось незвичайне: вдалині світилися вогники. Спочатку вона подумала, що це просто відблиск місяця, але коли підійшла ближче, вогники стали чіткішими. Вони були схожі на 
крихітних світлячків, але рухалися дивними візерунками. Раптом вона почула тихий голос за спиною: «Не йди далі». Анна швидко обернулася, але нікого не побачила. Вона була і 
налякана, і зацікавлена, тому продовжила йти до вогників. Наблизившись, вона побачила старі дерев'яні двері посеред лісу. Вони виглядали не до місця, ніби не належали до цього 
місця. Двері скрипнули, ніби хтось чекав на неї. Анна завагалася, але вирішила зайти всередину. На її подив, кімната була теплою і затишною, а в каміні палало вогнище. На столі 
були розкидані книги, а в кутку стояло старе крісло. На стіні висів великий портрет жінки з яскраво-зеленими очима. Жінка на портреті ніби дивилася прямо на Анну. Раптом у 
кімнаті стало темно, і портрет затремтів. Жінка вийшла з рами і прошепотіла: «Ти повинна була знайти це місце». Анна відчула, як її серце забилося швидше. Жінка простягнула 
руку і подала їй маленький сяючий камінь. Як тільки Анна взяла його, вона знову опинилася на краю лісу. Дивна двері зникла, і все знову здавалося нормальним. Але камінь все ще 
був у її руці. Він був холодним на дотик, і вона замислилася, чи знайде вона коли-небудь ці двері знову.

Translation 3
Минулого літа я влаштувалася на свою першу роботу в місцевому кафе. Я була схвильована, бо це був мій перший справжній досвід роботи, але й нервувала. У перший день мій 
керівник показав мені, як приймати замовлення і подавати напої. Мені довелося навчитися готувати каву і чай, що виявилося складніше, ніж я очікувала. Деякі клієнти були 
привітними, а інші — нетерплячими, що змушувало мене нервувати. Я також повинна була прибирати столи і мити посуд, коли не було занадто багато відвідувачів. Спочатку я 
працювала повільно і робила багато помилок. Але з часом я стала більш впевненою в собі. Мої колеги були дуже корисними і багато чого мене навчили. Вони показали мені, як 
поводитися з важкими клієнтами і справлятися з напруженими періодами. Я дізналася, що важливо залишатися спокійною і зосередженою, навіть коли ситуація стає напруженою. Іноді я 
працювала довгі години, але чайові, які я отримувала, того варті. До кінця літа я відчувала, що багато чого навчилася. Я пишалася собою за те, що добре працювала і заробляла 
гроші. Я навіть подружилася з деякими колегами. Мій начальник подякував мені за старанну працю і сказав, що я добре впоралася. Я зрозуміла, що робота в кафе навчила мене 
відповідальності, терпінню і командній роботі. Це не завжди було легко, але це був чудовий досвід. Тепер я відчуваю себе більш підготовленою до майбутніх робочих завдань. Я 
обов'язково розгляну можливість знову працювати в кафе.

Translation 4
Телефон є одним з найважливіших винаходів в історії. До його винаходу люди мали надсилати повідомлення, пишучи листи, що могло займати дні або навіть тижні. 
Александр Грем Белл винайшов телефон у 1876 році. Його метою було поліпшити спілкування для людей, які були глухими, як його мати. Перший успішний телефонний дзвінок зробив 
Белл, який сказав своєму помічнику: «Містере Ватсоне, підійдіть сюди. Я хочу вас бачити». Цей винахід змінив спосіб життя і роботи людей. За допомогою телефону люди могли 
миттєво спілкуватися на великі відстані. Спочатку телефони були великими і не дуже зручними у використанні, але з часом вони стали меншими і ефективнішими. На початку 20 
століття телефонні лінії були встановлені в містах, а згодом і в сільській місцевості. Це полегшило людям спілкування з родичами і друзями, які знаходилися далеко. У 1980-х 
роках були винайдені мобільні телефони, що дозволило людям дзвонити, не прив'язуючись до стаціонарного телефону. Сьогодні смартфони стали невід'ємною частиною повсякденного 
життя. Вони використовуються не тільки длядзвінків, але й для надсилання повідомлень, фотографування та доступу до Інтернету. Телефон революціонізував комунікацію та допоміг 
зблизити світ .Він відіграв важливу роль у бізнесі, освіті та службі екстреної допомоги. Винахід Олександра Грехема Белла був справді революційним. Зараз ми живемо у світі ,
де можлива миттєва комунікація. Телефон зробив життя швидшим, простішим та більш пов'язаним. Винахід Белла завжди буде пам'ятатися як одна з найважливіших історії технологій.

Translation 5
Шкільна форма є предметом дискусій вже багато років. Деякі люди вважають, що форма — це хороша ідея, а інші стверджують, що вона непотрібна. Одним з аргументів на користь 
шкільної форми є те, що вона створює рівність між учнями. Коли всі носять однаковий одяг, зменшується тиск щодо носіння дорогого або модного одягу. Це може допомогти 
запобігти булінгу, оскільки учнів не судять за їх зовнішнім виглядом. Уніформа також полегшує підготовку до школи, оскільки учням не доводиться щоранку вирішувати, що одягнути.
Крім того, уніформа сприяє розвитку дисципліни та шкільного духу. З іншого боку, деякі люди вважають, що уніформа обмежує особисте самовираження учнів. Одяг є для молодих людей 
способом проявити свою індивідуальність, а форма позбавляє їх цього. Деякі учні можуть відчувати дискомфорт у формі або не подобатися її дизайн. Крім того, форма може бути 
дорогою для деяких сімей, особливо якщо школа вимагає певних брендів або кольорів. На мою думку, шкільна форма має як переваги, так і недоліки. Вона може допомогти зменшити 
соціальний тиск і створити більш сприятливе для навчання середовище. Однак школи повинні допускати певну гнучкість щодо аксесуарів або повсякденного одягу. Учні повинні мати 
можливість виражати себе так, як їм зручно. Зрештою, важливо знайти баланс між уніформізмом та індивідуальністю. При прийнятті рішень щодо форми школи повинні враховувати 
потреби та думки як учнів, так і батьків.
